Diabetologia (2020) 63:1999–2006
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-020-05176-7




# autoimmune targets in type 1 diabetes?

Roberto Mallone [1,2] & Decio L. Eizirik [3,4]


Received: 18 February 2020 /Accepted: 14 April 2020 / Published online: 31 August 2020
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2020


Abstract
It is increasingly appreciated that the pathogenic mechanisms of type 1 diabetes involve both the autoimmune aggressors and their
beta cell targets, which engage in a conflicting dialogue within and possibly outside the pancreas. Indeed, autoimmune CD8 [+] T cells,
which are the final mediators of beta cell destruction, circulate at similar frequencies in type 1 diabetic and healthy individuals.
Hence a universal state of ‘benign’ islet autoimmunity exists, and we hypothesise that its progression to type 1 diabetes may at least
partially rely on a higher vulnerability of beta cells, which play a key, active role in disease development and/or amplification. We
posit that this autoimmune vulnerability is rooted in some features of beta cell biology: the stress imposed by the high rate of
production of insulin and other granule proteins, their dense vascularisation and the secretion of their products directly into the
bloodstream. Gene variants that may predispose individuals to this vulnerability have been identified, e.g. MDA5, TYK2, PTPN2.
They interact with environmental cues, such as viral infections, that may drive this genetic potential towards exacerbated local
inflammation and progressive beta cell loss. On top of this, beta cells set up compensatory responses, such as the unfolded protein
response, that become deleterious in the long term. The relative contribution of immune and beta cell drivers may vary and
phenotypic subtypes (endotypes) are likely to exist. This dual view argues for the use of circulating biomarkers of both autoimmunity and beta cell stress for disease staging, and for the implementation of both immunomodulatory and beta cell-protective
therapeutic strategies.


Keywords Antigen [. ] Autoimmunity [. ] Benign [. ] Coxsackievirus [. ] Endotype [. ] Epitope [. ] Islet [. ] Proinsulin [. ] Review [. ] T cell



Abbreviations
APC Antigen-presenting cell
CVB Coxsackievirus B
DRiP Defective ribosomal products


Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
[(https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-020-05176-7)](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-020-05176-7) contains a slideset of the
figures for download, which is available to authorised users.


- Roberto Mallone
[roberto.mallone@inserm.fr](mailto:roberto.mallone@inserm.fr)


1 Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, CNRS, INSERM, G.H.
Cochin-Port Royal, Cassini building, 123 boulevard de Port Royal,
75014 Paris, France


2 Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpitaux Universitaires de
Paris Centre-Université de Paris, Cochin Hospital, Service de
Diabétologie et Immunologie Clinique, 75014 Paris, France


3 ULB Center for Diabetes Research and WELBIO, Medical Faculty,
Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium


4 Indiana Biosciences Research Institute, Indianapolis, IN, USA



ER Endoplasmic reticulum
HLA-I HLA Class I
PD-1 Programmed cell death protein 1
PD-L1 Programmed cell death ligand 1
pLN Pancreatic lymph node
UPR Unfolded protein response


Introduction


There is mounting evidence that type 1 diabetes is a disease
not only of autoimmunity, but also of the target beta cell itself.
The active pathogenic role of the latter is suggested by several
observations: (1) the heterogeneity of immune infiltrates
across islets within a given pancreas [1]; (2) the expression
by beta cells of several type 1 diabetes-susceptible gene variants [2, 3], which modulate islet inflammation [4, 5]; (3) the
increased endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress [6] and metabolic biomarkers that precede the first signs of autoimmunity [7];
and (4) the impaired proinsulin processing that affects stressed


2000 Diabetologia (2020) 63:1999–2006



beta cells [8, 9], which may promote their immunogenicity by
further favouring ER stress and HLA Class I (HLA-I) presentation of proinsulin peptides. Notwithstanding possible differences in CD8 [+] T cell phenotype between type 1 diabetic and
healthy individuals [10, 11], our group [12, 13] and others [10,
11] have reported that islet-reactive CD8 [+] T cells circulate at
similar frequencies in type 1 diabetic and healthy individuals.
This may suggest that the progression from a physiological
state of ‘benign’ islet autoimmunity to type 1 diabetes may be
favoured by increased beta cell vulnerability to this universal
autoimmune T cell repertoire. Indeed, at variance with those
in the blood, islet-reactive CD8 [+] T cells are enriched in type 1
diabetic pancreases [12, 13], pointing to local factors that
promote their homing to the target organ.
A conflicting dialogue between beta cells and the immune
system is increasingly recognised as a key player in type 1 diabetes pathogenesis. Although this dialogue is bidirectional, we will
focus on the effects that the beta cell itself may have on nurturing
islet inflammation and autoimmune activation, setting up
compensatory mechanisms that become deleterious in the long
term. To do so, we suggest that we start with this question: why
are beta cells such privileged targets of autoimmunity? Endocrine
cells are defined as hormone-secreting cells organised in glands
devoid of a ductal system that secrete their products directly into
the bloodstream through their rich vascularisation. Several
features of this definition may explain beta cell vulnerability–a
paradigm that may also apply to other endocrine cells.


Weakness 1: making insulin and other
granule proteins is a stressful job


Following nutrient stimulation, (pro)insulin synthesis by beta
cells is increased by more than ten-fold, representing nearly
50% of total beta cell protein production. This functional adaptation imposes a constant burden on beta cells, particularly
considering that they are long-lived cells with limited replicative capacity. Beta cells fulfil this task by adapting ER function
to these changing demands by triggering the unfolded protein
response (UPR) [14]. The UPR decreases the ingress of newly
synthesised proteins into the ER and increases the extrusion of
misfolded proteins and the synthesis of ER chaperones, thus
upgrading the folding capacity of the organelle. If this fails to
restore ER homeostasis, beta cells eventually activate the
apoptotic pathway [14]. This dysregulated ER stress also
augments local inflammation via activation of the NF-κB pathway, increasing the local release of chemokines that attract
immune cells [14] and the generation of neo-antigens [15].
It remains to be determined what triggers the transition
from ‘physiological’ to ‘pathological’ UPR, and why this
occurs in relatively few individuals [14]. For example,
morbidly obese individuals with severe insulin resistance
and consequent beta cell functional overload do not usually



develop islet autoimmunity. Both genetic and environmental
factors are probably at play. Predisposing HLA Class II alleles
account for most of the genetic risk, which points to the role of
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in driving disease progression
via the uptake of beta cell material and the priming of CD4 [+] T
cells. Other type 1 diabetes-associated gene variants can
synergise with ER stress to potentiate local inflammation

[16]. These include MDA5 (also known as IFIH1), which
encodes a cytoplasmic receptor for viral double-stranded
RNA and is upregulated in human islets upon
Coxsackievirus B (CVB) infection and potentiates chemokine
release, and TYK2 and PTPN2, which encode key interferon
signalling transducers in beta cells. Similarly, environmental
cues, such as islet-tropic CVB infections, which are candidate
environmental triggers for type 1 diabetes, may synergise with
ER stress when stochastically coming together in time and
space. Of note, recent findings suggest that CVBs use the
UPR pathway IRE1α/XBP1s/JNK1 to foster their own replication in beta cells [17]. Further indirect support for the role of
ER stress and environmental factors such as CVBs come from
the observation that neighbouring alpha cells are spared by
islet autoimmunity. This may reflect their higher resistance
to ER stress-induced apoptosis, partly as a result of their
higher expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2l1/BclxL [18]. Moreover, alpha cells mount more efficient antiCVB responses, resulting in faster viral clearance that may
limit cell death and antigen release [16].
As described in other cell types [19], the increased rate of
(pro)insulin translation upon increased metabolic demands
and the resulting ER stress may also lead to an increased
frequency of misfolding events and accumulation of defective
ribosomal products (DRiPs), which are subsequently degraded by the proteasome. DRiPs constitute a major source of
peptides for the HLA-I processing and presentation pathway

[19]. Indeed, T cell epitopes derived from an insulin DRiP
have been described [20]. Several other epitopes originate
from the pre-proinsulin signal sequence [21], which becomes
an abundant by-product of proinsulin biosynthesis upon its
translocation into the ER. Moreover, ER stress upregulates
the ER aminopeptidase 1 that trims the pre-proinsulin signal
sequence [22]. The burden imposed on the ER by the secretory activity involves the biosynthesis not only of insulin, but
also of other granule proteins, e.g. chromogranin-A,
secretogranin-5, urocortin-3 and proconvertases. These
proteins are major contributors to the HLA-I peptidome
presented by beta cells and recognised by T cells [13] and
share several features with insulin: they are soluble proteins
translated as precursors, whose maturation into their bioactive
products requires cleavage of their signal sequence (with
several T cell epitopes mapping to this region), followed by
further cleavage. It is thus possible that the impaired proinsulin processing described in beta cells from type 1 diabetic
patients [8, 9] may also apply to these proteins and divert them


Diabetologia (2020) 63:1999–2006 2001



towards the HLA-I presentation pathway, thus increasing the
immunogenicity of beta cells.
A similar shunting towards the HLA-I pathway may
take place under inflammatory conditions, in which
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion is downregulated
and unused granules are degraded through crinophagy.
Islet inflammation may also lead to the increased generation of neoepitopes that are not encoded in the
genome. They are therefore regarded as ‘non-self’,
possibly escaping thymic deletion, although such deletion may be marginal overall [12, 23]. Neo-epitopes can
be generated by modulation of mRNA splicing [13] and
by post-translational modifications [15] via the upregulation of modifying enzymes, either expressed by beta
cells or released by immune cells (e.g. neutrophils).
‘Hybrid’ peptides generated by the fusion of noncontiguous sequences from the same proteins or from
distinct partners have also been described [24]. This
so-called transpeptidation process was originally reported to generate CD8 [+] T cell epitopes through the proteasome pathway [25], but in beta cells it may also generate CD4 [+] T cell epitopes and take place in the insulin
granules and, more likely, in the crinosomes (formed
from the fusion of granules and lysosomes). The peculiar biology of granule degradation through crinosomes,
which contain high amounts of proteins constantly
catabolised within a restrained space, may indeed favour
transpeptidation events and beta cell immunogenicity

[26]. It is currently uncertain whether this is a physiological process upregulated by inflammation and whether neo-epitope generation may play an initiating or
amplifying role in type 1 diabetes pathogenesis.


Weakness 2: islets are highly vascularised,
which favours face-to-face encounters
between immune cells and beta cells


At the local level, the encounter between immune cells and
beta cells is favoured by the rich vascularisation of islets,
which provides easy access for immune cells from distant
sites. While only activated immune cells, likely primed in
pancreatic lymph nodes (pLNs), can readily cross the vascular
endothelium, the ensuing inflammatory microenvironment
increases vascular permeability and further facilitates access,
even for naive and non-islet-reactive T cells [27, 28].
This access is also facilitated by pLNs, which drain the
contents not only of the pancreas itself, but also of adjacent
regions of the gut, thus providing an ideal crossroad for
immune cells transiting between these compartments. This is
relevant in light of the importance of the immune environment
of the gut in shaping peripheral tolerance, and its modulation
by nutrients, the endogenous microbiome [29, 30] and the



intercurrent infections occurring through the gastrointestinal
tract, e.g. by CVBs [31].
The ‘words’ of the resulting local dialogue between beta
cells and immune cells are (1) cytokines (e.g. type I IFNs, IL1β and TNF-α) released by immune cells; (2) chemokines
(e.g. CCL2 and CXCL10) released by beta cells, which further
attract and activate immune cells; and (3) putative ‘danger’
signals (e.g. nucleic acid fragments and modified proteins/
peptides released by damaged or dying beta cells) [32].
Indeed, observations in the NOD mouse suggest that beta cell
death releases self-DNA and recruits neutrophils to the
pancreas [33]. The concerted action of self-DNA, anti-DNA
antibodies and DNA-binding anti-microbial peptides secreted
by neutrophils activates plasmacytoid dendritic cells, leading
to IFN-α production and amplification of the autoimmune
response through T cell recruitment. In this scenario, IFN-α
plays a key role in early insulitis by linking the activation of
innate and adaptive immunity, as documented in other autoimmune diseases such as lupus. This process may be further
ramped up by the genetic background and by putative environmental cues that induce beta cell death, such as CVB infections [16, 32].
The other key amplifying role of inflammatory cytokines is
to make beta cells more ‘visible’, and hence vulnerable, to T
cells. Indeed, inflammatory cytokines upregulate HLA-I
expression on beta cells and increase the number of peptides
presented for scanning and recognition by CD8 [+] T cells [13].
IFN-α also displays some peculiar features in this scenario.
First, an IFN-α signature precedes the appearance of autoantibodies in the peripheral blood [34, 35] and may be associated
with neutrophils [36]. This is likely to reflect an induction
phase of islet autoimmunity, orchestrated by innate immune
cells and followed by an amplification stage triggered by other
cytokines, e.g. IFN-γ, TNF-α and IL-1β. Second, IFN-α
induces greater ER stress in beta cells compared with IFN-γ,
which translates into apoptosis only upon concomitant exposure to IL-1β [37]. Third, IFN-α induces long-lasting HLA-I
upregulation [38], which likely translates into sustained antigen presentation.
New findings suggest that the components of this dialogue
are not always deleterious to the beta cells. Indeed, IFN-α and
IFN-γ upregulate beta cell expression not only of chemokines
and HLA-I [37], but also of programmed cell death ligand 1
(PD-L1), which is hyper-expressed in the beta cells of type 1
diabetic patients [39, 40], possibly reflecting an active yet
insufficient peripheral tolerance mechanism through
programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) binding and T cell
inhibition. Therapeutic anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies are
increasingly used for treating cancers that evade immune
surveillance by overexpressing PD-L1. While highly effective
at inducing tumour remission, 8–10% of treated patients
develop endocrine autoimmune disorders, e.g. hypophysitis,
thyroiditis, adrenal disease and, in 0.4–0.9% of patients, a


2002 Diabetologia (2020) 63:1999–2006



fulminant form of diabetes [41]. The mechanisms underlying
this form of diabetes remain unclear, but they may involve the
neutralisation of the key PD-1 ‘brake’ in the autoimmune T
cells that we all harbour [42]. In line with this possibility, PD1/PD-L1 inhibition accelerates diabetes, while PD-L1 overexpression in beta cells prevents or reverts diabetes in NOD mice

[42].
Relevant to this theme of immune defence mechanisms in
human islets is the paucity of information on tissue-resident T
cells, which are non-recirculating memory T cells that localise
stably in the organs, expand upon local inflammation and may
provide a first response against infection re-encounters [43].
In islets from non-diabetic donors, the group of Cilio found
that most (80%) immune cells are CD3 [+] T cells, 80% of which
had a central/effector memory phenotype expressing the
CD69 and CD103 markers of tissue residency [44]. One
feature that contrasts with the high vascular accessibility of
the islets is that, in non-diabetic donors, relatively few
immune (CD45 [+] ) cells are found here (~1 per islet equivalent)

[45], while a larger proportion can be found scattered in the
exocrine and peri-islet tissue [44]. Another recurrently reported striking observation is the near absence of regulatory T
cells [44] compared with other organs, irrespective of disease
status. This may represent another feature making islets more
vulnerable to autoimmunity.



Fig. 1 Weaknesses in the biology
of beta cells that may promote
their autoimmune vulnerability.
This figure is available as part of a
[downloadable slideset](https://static-content.springer.com/esm/art%3A10.1007%2Fs00125-020-05176-7/MediaObjects/125_2020_5176_MOESM1_ESM.pptx)





Weakness 3: beta cells secrete their products
into the bloodstream—The ‘Wi-fi’ dialogue
with immune cells?


The other key feature that may render beta cells susceptible
autoimmune targets is their ability to communicate at distance.
This is an integral part of their physiology, as insulin and other
granule contents are released directly into the bloodstream to
exert their metabolic effects at a distance. Since insulin and other
granule proteins [13] are also target antigens of islet autoimmunity, not all APCs may need to reach the pancreas for antigen
uptake, as such antigens may also become available at distant
sites. Furthermore, stressed beta cells also release high amounts
of proinsulin, which has a longer half-life than insulin and binds
poorly to the insulin receptor. It can thus remain systemically
available for a longer time, favouring uptake by APCs outside
the pancreas. This ‘Wi-Fi’ system of extra-pancreatic antigen
delivery may also involve other mechanisms. For example,
secretory granules also contain antigenic insulin peptides, which,
together with intact granule proteins, may provide another source
of T cell sensitisation at a distance [46]. According to the model
proposed by Unanue, this represents a physiological process.
Indeed, such a release is found in both pLNs and non-draining
LNs in the NOD mouse and other murine strains and is triggered
by glucose challenge [46]. Interestingly, the most immunogenic




















Diabetologia (2020) 63:1999–2006 2003



















Fig. 2 Autoimmune aggressiveness in health and type 1 diabetes and
disease endotypes according to beta cell and immune drivers. (a) The
continuum between health and the sequential stages of type 1 diabetes
(T1D), which could reflect the transition between a ‘benign’ state and an
increasingly aggressive state of islet autoimmunity. At stage 3 of type 1
diabetes, progressive autoimmunity may also be graded according to
clinical phenotype (‘slow’ vs classical type 1 diabetes) and age of onset


CD4 [+] T cell epitopes in the NOD mouse are derived from insulin
B-chain peptides that are found proximally in beta cell
crinosome and secretome fractions, and distally bound to
MHC Class II molecules in islets, pLNs and spleen [26], lending
strong support to this model of systemic antigen seeding. In most
cases, the outcome of this process may be systemic tolerance.
The switch to autoimmunity may depend on the prior history of
T cells and on the presence of danger signals, which may come
from stressed beta cells themselves or from exogenous inflammatory triggers (e.g. viral infections) and microbiome composition [47]. Beta cells also release intact granules [48] and
exosomes carrying antigens such as proinsulin, GAD65 and islet
antigen 2 (IA-2) [49], which are endocytosed more efficiently
than soluble proteins/peptides and may further feed distant
APCs. Beta cell-derived microRNAs released into the bloodstream, either in soluble form or associated with exosomes

[50], may exert additional immunomodulatory effects.


Translational relevance


Figure 1 summarises the pathways that may make beta cells
active players in their own destruction and favour their



(adulthood vs childhood). (b) Illustration of how the relative weight of
beta cell vs immune drivers may differ according to type 1 diabetes
endotypes. These drivers are however dynamic and interconnected. For
example, islet autoimmunity induces ER stress in beta cells, which may
enhance inflammation and antigen presentation, thus aggravating autoimmunity and creating a vicious cycle. This figure is available as part of a
[downloadable slideset](https://static-content.springer.com/esm/art%3A10.1007%2Fs00125-020-05176-7/MediaObjects/125_2020_5176_MOESM1_ESM.pptx)


vulnerability. These emerging concepts are of major importance not only for our understanding of type 1 diabetes pathophysiology, but also for improving disease management.
The first implication is that circulating biomarkers of beta
cell stress may be complementary to immune biomarkers such
as autoantibodies [51]. Besides the established value of
following residual insulin secretion by measuring C-peptide
release after a glucose challenge, circulating proinsulin is now
widely accepted as one such biomarker. Other products
released by beta cells (e.g. GAD65, IAPP, microRNAs) are
under scrutiny, while the detection of DNA species carrying
beta cell-specific methylation marks and released upon cell
death may not be suitable outside the ‘acute’ islet transplantation setting.
The second implication is that agents aimed at limiting the
autoimmune vulnerability of beta cells should find their place
in the search for disease-modifying treatments, either alone or
in combination with immunotherapies. Indeed, a recurrent
observation from the immunotherapies that achieved some
impact on the decline of insulin secretion after the clinical
onset of type 1 diabetes is that their efficacy is typically
confined to the first months of treatment [52]. The beta cell
insulin secretion subsequently resumes its usual slope of


2004 Diabetologia (2020) 63:1999–2006



decline, possibly suggesting residual pathogenic mechanisms
that remain untargeted. Such mechanisms may well be intrinsic to beta cells and their inappropriate, self-amplifying
response to the immune assault, which is reminiscent of the
beta cell ‘suicide’ concept coined by G. F. Bottazzo, who
noted ‘The aim is noble but the act smacks of danger!’ [53].
This wish to integrate beta cell-protective agents into
the therapeutic arsenal of type 1 diabetes remains,
however, unfulfilled to date. Which pathways should
be targeted? Reducing ER stress and oxidative damage
are obvious candidates, and some agents already
licensed for other indications have been proposed.
These include ursodeoxycholic acid, a bile acid used
to reduce cholestasis which can also function as a chaperone to quell ER stress [6]; and verapamil, an antihypertensive, anti-arrhythmic drug that inhibits
thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP), a pro-oxidative
factor that activates the inflammasome [54]. Glucagonlike peptide 1 (GLP-1) agonists have also been shown
to have beneficial effects on beta cells in rodent models,
but whether the benefits observed in some trials on type
1 diabetic patients reflect an improvement in residual
insulin secretion is currently debated [55]. Other agents
under study target IFN-α signalling pathways in beta
cells, e.g. JAK/TYK2/STAT inhibitors [38, 40, 56].


Autoimmune vs beta cell disease: chicken
or egg?


Is the initiation of islet autoimmunity triggered by
immune cells or by the beta cells themselves? In support
of the latter possibility, altering the identity of beta cells
by boosting their proliferation protects NOD mice from
autoimmune diabetes [57]. However, it is noteworthy
that islets from these protected mice are less vulnerable
but not resistant to autoimmunity when transferred into
unprotected recipients and that, conversely, bone marrow
transfer from unprotected mice into protected recipients
triggers diabetes. Indeed, proliferating beta cells exerted
an indirect protective effect by modulating T cell selfreactivity and boosting regulatory T cells [57], an observation that underlines the far-reaching effects of this
immune–beta cell crosstalk. Mirroring these mouse studies, two human case reports lend strong arguments for an
initiating role of immune cells: (1) twin-to-twin transplantation of a non-diabetic pancreas into a type 1
diabetic recipient led to rapid autoimmune relapse [58];
and (2) conversely, bone marrow transplantation from a
HLA-identical type 1 diabetic sibling into a non-diabetic
recipient led to the development of type 1 diabetes [59].
Thus, the role of the beta cell may be to amplify rather
than to initiate the pathogenic process of type 1 diabetes.



Conclusions and perspectives


A unifying picture is emerging that prompts us to consider
type 1 diabetes as a disease of both the immune system and
beta cells, resulting from a conflicting dialogue between these
two players. Given the phenotypic heterogeneity of type 1
diabetes, different phenotypic subtypes (endotypes) of islet
autoimmunity are increasingly recognised based on putative
pathogenic mechanisms and, likely, different responsiveness
to immunotherapy (‘theratypes’) [60, 61]. It is conceivable
that distinct endotypes may also exist according to the aggressiveness of islet autoimmunity (benign vs progressive) and to
the relative contribution of immune and beta cell drivers to
such aggressiveness (Fig. 2). The recent description of an
overlap between the hyper-immune (CD20 [h i g h] )
immunohistological endotype of insulitis and altered proinsulin processing in beta cells exemplifies the intertwining of the
two participants in the dialogue [62].


Funding RM is funded by grants from The Leona M. and Harry B.
Helmsley Charitable Trust (Helmsley #1901-03689), the Fondation
Francophone pour la Recherche sur le Diabète, the Fondation pour la
Recherche Médicale (EQU20193007831) and the Agence Nationale de
la Recherche (ANR-19-CE15-0014-01). DLE is funded by Welbio/FRFS
(WELBIO-CR-2019C-04), Belgium, and start-up funds from the Indiana
Biosciences Research Institute, IN, USA. RM and DLE are funded by
JDRF (2-SRA-2016-164-Q-R) and by the Innovative Medicines Initiative
2 Joint Undertaking under grant agreement numbers 115797 and 945268
(INNODIA and INNODIA HARVEST). These Joint Undertakings
receive support from the Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
program, European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries
Associations, JDRF and The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley
Charitable Trust.


Authors’ relationships and activities The authors declare that there are no
relationships or activities that might bias, or be perceived to bias, their
work.


Contribution statement RM and DLE contributed equally to this work.
Both authors approved the version to be published.


References


1. Campbell-Thompson M, Fu A, Kaddis JS et al (2016) Insulitis and
beta-cell mass in the natural history of type 1 diabetes. Diabetes
[65(3):719–731. https://doi.org/10.2337/db15-0779](https://doi.org/10.2337/db15-0779)
2. Santin I, Eizirik DL (2013) Candidate genes for type 1 diabetes
modulate pancreatic islet inflammation and beta-cell apoptosis.
Diabetes Obes Metab 15(Suppl 3):71–81. [https://doi.org/10.1111/](https://doi.org/10.1111/dom.12162)
[dom.12162](https://doi.org/10.1111/dom.12162)
3. Ramos-Rodriguez M, Raurell-Vila H, Colli ML et al (2019) The
impact of proinflammatory cytokines on the beta-cell regulatory
landscape provides insights into the genetics of type 1 diabetes.
Nat Genet 51(11):1588–1595. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-019-0524-6)
[019-0524-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-019-0524-6)
4. Marroqui L, Santin I, Dos Santos RS, Marselli L, Marchetti P,
Eizirik DL (2014) BACH2, a candidate risk gene for type 1 diabetes, regulates apoptosis in pancreatic beta-cells via JNK1


Diabetologia (2020) 63:1999–2006 2005



modulation and crosstalk with the candidate gene PTPN2. Diabetes
[63(7):2516–2527. https://doi.org/10.2337/db13-1443](https://doi.org/10.2337/db13-1443)
5. Moore F, Colli ML, Cnop M et al (2009) PTPN2, a candidate gene
for type 1 diabetes, modulates interferon-gamma-induced pancreatic beta-cell apoptosis. Diabetes 58(6):1283–1291. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.2337/db08-1510)
[10.2337/db08-1510](https://doi.org/10.2337/db08-1510)
6. Engin F, Yermalovich A, Nguyen T et al (2013) Restoration of the
unfolded protein response in pancreatic beta cells protects mice
against type 1 diabetes. Sci Transl Med 5(211):211ra156. [https://](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3006534)
[doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3006534](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3006534)
7. Pflueger M, Seppanen-Laakso T, Suortti T et al (2011) Age- and
islet autoimmunity-associated differences in amino acid and lipid
metabolites in children at risk for type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 60(11):
[2740–2747. https://doi.org/10.2337/db10-1652](https://doi.org/10.2337/db10-1652)
8. Rodriguez-Calvo T, Zapardiel-Gonzalo J, Amirian N et al (2017)
Increase in pancreatic proinsulin and preservation of beta-cell mass
in autoantibody-positive donors prior to type 1 diabetes onset.
[Diabetes 66(5):1334–1345. https://doi.org/10.2337/db16-1343](https://doi.org/10.2337/db16-1343)
9. Wasserfall C, Nick HS, Campbell-Thompson M et al (2017)
Persistence of pancreatic insulin mRNA expression and proinsulin
protein in type 1 diabetes pancreata. Cell Metab 26(3):568–575
[e563. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2017.08.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2017.08.013)
10. Skowera A, Ladell K, McLaren JE et al (2015) Beta-cell-specific
CD8 T cell phenotype in type 1 diabetes reflects chronic
autoantigen exposure. Diabetes 64(3):916–925. [https://doi.org/10.](https://doi.org/10.2337/db14-0332)
[2337/db14-0332](https://doi.org/10.2337/db14-0332)
11. Wiedeman AE, Muir VS, Rosasco MG et al (2019) Autoreactive
CD8+ T cell exhaustion distinguishes subjects with slow type 1
diabetes progression. J Clin Invest 130(1):480–490. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI126595)
[org/10.1172/JCI126595](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI126595)
12. Culina S, Lalanne AI, Afonso G et al (2018) Islet-reactive CD8+ T
cell frequencies in the pancreas, but not in blood, distinguish type 1
diabetic patients from healthy donors. Sci Immunol 3(20):
[eaao4013. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aao4013](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aao4013)
13. Gonzalez-Duque S, Azoury ME, Colli ML et al (2018)
Conventional and neo-antigenic peptides presented by beta cells
are targeted by circulating naive CD8+ T cells in type 1 diabetic
and healthy donors. Cell Metab 28(6):946–960 e946. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2018.07.007)
[org/10.1016/j.cmet.2018.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2018.07.007)
14. Eizirik DL, Miani M, Cardozo AK (2013) Signalling danger: endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded protein response in
pancreatic islet inflammation. Diabetologia 56(2):234–241.
[https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-012-2762-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-012-2762-3)
15. James EA, Pietropaolo M, Mamula MJ (2018) Immune recognition
of beta-cells: neoepitopes as key players in the loss of tolerance.
[Diabetes 67(6):1035–1042. https://doi.org/10.2337/dbi17-0030](https://doi.org/10.2337/dbi17-0030)
16. Op de Beeck A, Eizirik DL (2016) Viral infections in type 1 diabetes mellitus–why the beta cells? Nat Rev Endocrinol 12(5):263–
[273. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2016.30](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2016.30)
17. Colli ML, Paula FM, Marselli L et al (2019) Coxsackievirus B
tailors the unfolded protein response to favour viral amplification
[in pancreatic beta cells. J Innate Immun 11(4):375–390. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1159/000496034)
[org/10.1159/000496034](https://doi.org/10.1159/000496034)
18. Marroqui L, Masini M, Merino B et al (2015) Pancreatic alpha cells
are resistant to metabolic stress-induced apoptosis in type 2 diabetes. EBioMedicine 2(5):378–385. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.03.012)
[2015.03.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.03.012)
19. Anton LC, Yewdell JW (2014) Translating DRiPs: MHC class I
immunosurveillance of pathogens and tumors. J Leukoc Biol 95(4):
[551–562. https://doi.org/10.1189/jlb.1113599](https://doi.org/10.1189/jlb.1113599)
20. Kracht MJ, van Lummel M, Nikolic T et al (2017) Autoimmunity
against a defective ribosomal insulin gene product in type 1 diabe[tes. Nat Med 23(4):501–507. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4289](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4289)
21. Kronenberg-Versteeg D, Eichmann M, Russell MA et al (2018)
Molecular pathways for immune recognition of preproinsulin signal



[peptide in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 67(4):687–696. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.2337/db17-0021)
[10.2337/db17-0021](https://doi.org/10.2337/db17-0021)
22. Thomaidou S, Kracht MJL, van der Slik A et al (2020) β-Cell stress
shapes CTL immune recognition of preproinsulin signal peptide by
posttranscriptional regulation of endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase 1. Diabetes 69(4):670–680. [https://doi.org/10.2337/db19-](https://doi.org/10.2337/db19-0984)
[0984](https://doi.org/10.2337/db19-0984)
23. Davis MM (2015) Not-so-negative selection. Immunity 43(5):833–
[835. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2015.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2015.11.002)
24. Delong T, Wiles TA, Baker RL et al (2016) Pathogenic CD4 T cells
in type 1 diabetes recognize epitopes formed by peptide fusion.
Science 351(6274):711–714. [https://doi.org/10.1126/science.](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aad2791)
[aad2791](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aad2791)
25. Vigneron N, Stroobant V, Chapiro J et al (2004) An antigenic
peptide produced by peptide splicing in the proteasome. Science
[304(5670):587–590. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1095522](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1095522)
26. Wan X, Vomund AN, Peterson OJ, Chervonsky AV, Lichti CF,
Unanue ER (2020) The MHC-II peptidome of pancreatic islets
identifies key features of autoimmune peptides. Nat Immunol
[21(4):455–463. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-020-0623-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-020-0623-7)
27. Magnuson AM, Thurber GM, Kohler RH, Weissleder R, Mathis D,
Benoist C (2015) Population dynamics of islet-infiltrating cells in
autoimmune diabetes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112(5):1511–
[1516. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1423769112](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1423769112)
28. Christoffersson G, Chodaczek G, Ratliff SS, Coppieters K, von
Herrath MG (2018) Suppression of diabetes by accumulation of
non-islet-specific CD8 [+] effector T cells in pancreatic islets. Sci
Immunol 3(21):eaam6533. [https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aam6533)
[aam6533](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aam6533)
29. Stewart CJ, Ajami NJ, O'Brien JL et al (2018) Temporal development of the gut microbiome in early childhood from the TEDDY
[study. Nature 562(7728):583–588. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0617-x)
[018-0617-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0617-x)
30. Vatanen T, Franzosa EA, Schwager R et al (2018) The human gut
microbiome in early-onset type 1 diabetes from the TEDDY study.
Nature 562(7728):589–594. [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0620-2)
[0620-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0620-2)
31. Vehik K, Lynch KF, Wong MC et al (2019) Prospective virome
analyses in young children at increased genetic risk for type 1
diabetes. Nat Med 25(12):1865–1872. [https://doi.org/10.1038/](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0667-0)
[s41591-019-0667-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0667-0)
32. Eizirik DL, Colli ML, Ortis F (2009) The role of inflammation in
insulitis and beta-cell loss in type 1 diabetes. Nat Rev Endocrinol
[5(4):219–226. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2009.21](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2009.21)
33. Diana J, Simoni Y, Furio L et al (2013) Crosstalk between neutrophils, B-1a cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cells initiates autoim[mune diabetes. Nat Med 19(1):65–73. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3042)
[3042](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3042)
34. Kallionpaa H, Elo LL, Laajala E et al (2014) Innate immune activity
is detected prior to seroconversion in children with HLA-conferred
type 1 diabetes susceptibility. Diabetes 63(7):2402–2414. [https://](https://doi.org/10.2337/db13-1775)
[doi.org/10.2337/db13-1775](https://doi.org/10.2337/db13-1775)
35. Ferreira RC, Guo H, Coulson RM et al (2014) A type I interferon
transcriptional signature precedes autoimmunity in children genet[ically at risk for type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 63(7):2538–2550. https://](https://doi.org/10.2337/db13-1777)
[doi.org/10.2337/db13-1777](https://doi.org/10.2337/db13-1777)
36. Vecchio F, Lo Buono N, Stabilini A et al (2018) Abnormal neutrophil signature in the blood and pancreas of presymptomatic and
symptomatic type 1 diabetes. JCI insight [3(18). https://doi.org/10.](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.122146)
[1172/jci.insight.122146](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.122146)
37. Marroqui L, Dos Santos RS, Op de Beeck A et al (2017) Interferonalpha mediates human beta cell HLA class I overexpression, endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis, three hallmarks of early
human type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia 60(4):656–667. [https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-016-4201-3)
[org/10.1007/s00125-016-4201-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-016-4201-3)


2006 Diabetologia (2020) 63:1999–2006



38. Coomans de Brachene A, Dos Santos RS, Marroqui L et al (2018)
IFN-alpha induces a preferential long-lasting expression of MHC
class I in human pancreatic beta cells. Diabetologia 61(3):636–640.
[https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-017-4536-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-017-4536-4)
39. Osum KC, Burrack AL, Martinov T et al (2018) Interferon-gamma
drives programmed death-ligand 1 expression on islet beta cells to
limit T cell function during autoimmune diabetes. Sci Rep 8(1):
[8295. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-26471-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-26471-9)
40. Colli ML, Hill JLE, Marroqui L et al (2018) PDL1 is expressed in
the islets of people with type 1 diabetes and is up-regulated by
interferons-alpha and-gamma via IRF1 induction. EBioMedicine.
[36:367–375. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.09.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.09.040)
41. Stamatouli AM, Quandt Z, Perdigoto AL et al (2018) Collateral
damage: insulin-dependent diabetes induced with checkpoint inhibitors. Diabetes 67(8):1471–1480. [https://doi.org/10.2337/dbi18-](https://doi.org/10.2337/dbi18-0002)
[0002](https://doi.org/10.2337/dbi18-0002)
42. Ehlers MR (2018) Who let the dogs out? The ever-present threat of
autoreactive T cells. Sci Immunol 3(20):eaar6602. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aar6602)
[10.1126/sciimmunol.aar6602](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aar6602)
43. Szabo PA, Miron M, Farber DL (2019) Location, location, location:
Tissue resident memory T cells in mice and humans. Sci Immunol
[4(34):eaas9673. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aas9673](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aas9673)
44. Radenkovic M, Uvebrant K, Skog O et al (2017) Characterization
of resident lymphocytes in human pancreatic islets. Clin Exp
[Immunol 187(3):418–427. https://doi.org/10.1111/cei.12892](https://doi.org/10.1111/cei.12892)
45. Butcher MJ, Hallinger D, Garcia E et al (2014) Association of
proinflammatory cytokines and islet resident leucocytes with islet
[dysfunction in type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 57(3):491–501. https://](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-013-3116-5)
[doi.org/10.1007/s00125-013-3116-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-013-3116-5)
46. Wan X, Zinselmeyer BH, Zakharov PN et al (2018) Pancreatic
islets communicate with lymphoid tissues via exocytosis of insulin
peptides. Nature 560(7716):107–111. [https://doi.org/10.1038/](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0341-6)
[s41586-018-0341-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0341-6)
47. Unanue ER, Wan X (2019) The immunoreactive platform of the
pancreatic islets influences the development of autoreactivity.
[Diabetes 68(8):1544–1551. https://doi.org/10.2337/dbi18-0048](https://doi.org/10.2337/dbi18-0048)
48. Vomund AN, Zinselmeyer BH, Hughes J et al (2015) Beta cells
transfer vesicles containing insulin to phagocytes for presentation to
[T cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112(40):E5496–E5502. https://](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1515954112)
[doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1515954112](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1515954112)
49. Cianciaruso C, Phelps EA, Pasquier M et al (2017) Primary human
and rat beta-cells release the intracellular autoantigens GAD65, IA2, and proinsulin in exosomes together with cytokine-induced
enhancers of immunity. Diabetes 66(2):460–473. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.2337/db16-0671)
[10.2337/db16-0671](https://doi.org/10.2337/db16-0671)
50. Ventriglia G, Mancarella F, Sebastiani G et al (2020) miR-409-3p is
reduced in plasma and islet immune infiltrates of NOD diabetic
mice and is differentially expressed in people with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetologia 63(1):124–136. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-019-](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-019-05026-1)
[05026-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-019-05026-1)



51. Sims EK, Evans-Molina C, Tersey SA, Eizirik DL, Mirmira RG
(2018) Biomarkers of islet beta cell stress and death in type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia. 61(11):2259–2265. [https://doi.org/10.1007/](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-018-4712-1)
[s00125-018-4712-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-018-4712-1)
52. Greenbaum CJ, Schatz DA, Haller MJ, Sanda S (2012) Through the
fog: recent clinical trials to preserve beta-cell function in type 1
diabetes. Diabetes 61(6):1323–1330. [https://doi.org/10.2337/](https://doi.org/10.2337/db11-1452)
[db11-1452](https://doi.org/10.2337/db11-1452)
53. Bottazzo GF (1993) Banting lecture. On the honey disease. A
dialogue with Socrates. Diabetes 42(5):778–800. [https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.2337/diab.42.5.778)
[10.2337/diab.42.5.778](https://doi.org/10.2337/diab.42.5.778)
54. Ovalle F, Grimes T, Xu G et al (2018) Verapamil and beta cell
function in adults with recent-onset type 1 diabetes. Nat Med
[24(8):1108–1112. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0089-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0089-4)
55. Kielgast U, Holst JJ, Madsbad S (2011) Antidiabetic actions of
endogenous and exogenous GLP-1 in type 1 diabetic patients with
and without residual beta-cell function. Diabetes 60(5):1599–1607.
[https://doi.org/10.2337/db10-1790](https://doi.org/10.2337/db10-1790)
56. Trivedi PM, Graham KL, Scott NA et al (2017) Repurposed
JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor reverses established autoimmune insulitis in
NOD mice. Diabetes 66(6):1650–1660. [https://doi.org/10.2337/](https://doi.org/10.2337/db16-1250)
[db16-1250](https://doi.org/10.2337/db16-1250)
57. Dirice E, Kahraman S, De Jesus DF et al (2019) Increased beta-cell
proliferation before immune cell invasion prevents progression of
[type 1 diabetes. Nat Metab 1(5):509–518. https://doi.org/10.1038/](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-019-0061-8)
[s42255-019-0061-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-019-0061-8)
58. Sutherland DE, Sibley R, Xu XZ et al (1984) Twin-to-twin pancreas transplantation: reversal and reenactment of the pathogenesis of
type I diabetes. Trans Assoc Am Phys 97:80–87
59. Lampeter EF, Homberg M, Quabeck K et al (1993) Transfer of
insulin-dependent diabetes between HLA-identical siblings by
bone marrow transplantation. Lancet 341(8855):1243–1244.
[https://doi.org/10.1016/0140-6736(93)91148-f](https://doi.org/10.1016/0140-6736(93)91148-f)
60. Battaglia M, Ahmed S, Anderson MS et al (2020) Introducing the
endotype concept to address the challenge of disease heterogeneity
in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 43(1):5–12. [https://doi.org/10.](https://doi.org/10.2337/dc19-0880)
[2337/dc19-0880](https://doi.org/10.2337/dc19-0880)
61. Leete P, Mallone R, Richardson SJ, Sosenko JM, Redondo MJ,
Evans-Molina C (2018) The effect of age on the progression and
severity of type 1 diabetes: potential effects on disease mechanisms.
Curr Diab Rep 18(11):115. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s11892-018-](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11892-018-1083-4)
[1083-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11892-018-1083-4)
62. Leete P, Oram RA, McDonald TJ et al (2020) Studies of insulin and
proinsulin in pancreas and serum support the existence of
aetiopathological endotypes of type 1 diabetes associated with age
at diagnosis. Diabetologia. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-020-](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-020-05115-6)
[05115-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-020-05115-6)


Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


